#summary Old Documentation of x86/x64 Machine Code
<pre> 
/--------------\
|Decoding Modes|
\--------------/
Decoding mode specifies the default size of an operation.
A code block is constructed from a sequence of instructions.
The decoding mode tells how that code(-the instructions) is being processed.
They can be processed in 16, 32 or 64 bits.
The number of bits is the operation size of each instruction.
DOS is known to be a 16 bits OS, thus the CPU executes its code in a 16 bits environment.
Windows and Linux are 32 bits, and even 64 bits nowadays...
Every piece of code or an instruction has to be disassembled in the corresponding size it was assembled/compiled to.
The disassembler disassembles the instructions according to this decoding mode only,
it makes much sense, because every decode mode supports different instruction sets or instructions and
can do different operations, so you have to know in advance the decoding mode of the stream you want to disassemble.
 
The 3 modes supported by diStorm are:
16 bits (Decode16Bits) - Instruction sets supported: 80186/80286
32 (Decode32Bits) - Instruction sets supported: 80x86 (Not including x64)
AMD64 (Decode64Bits) - Instruction sets supported: 80x86 + x64 (Not including prohibited instructions)
 
In addition to these instruction sets, there are more instruction sets that are supported no matter the mode,
these are the FPU, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, 3DNow!, 3DNow! extensions (and some P6 instructions), VMX and SSSE3 instructions.
Maybe the 16 bits decoding mode doesn't necessarily require all these sets,
but I found it useful, it can't harm nobody, anyways...
 
Every decode mode has a default operand size and address size, more on this later.
 
/-----------------\
|80x86 Instruction|
\-----------------/
A 80x86 instruction is divided to a number of elements:
1)Instruction prefixes, affects the behaviour of the instruction's operation.
2)Mandatory prefix used as an opcode byte for SSE instructions.
3)Opcode bytes, could be one or more bytes (up to 3 whole bytes).
4)ModR/M byte is optional and sometimes could contain a part of the opcode itself.
5)SIB byte is optional and represents complex memory indirection forms.
6)Displacement is optional and it is a value of a varying size of bytes(byte, word, long) and used as an offset.
7)Immediate is optional and it is used as a general number value built from a varying size of bytes(byte, word, long).
 
The format looks as follows:
 
/-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
|*Prefixes | *Mandatory Prefix | *REX Prefix | <b>Opcode Bytes</b> | *ModR/M | *SIB | *Displacement (1,2 or 4 bytes) | *Immediate (1,2 or 4 bytes) |
\-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------/
* means the element is optional.
 
/--------------------\
|Instruction Prefixes|
\--------------------/
The instruction prefixes are optional, they are used when the default behaviour of the instruction lacks functioning.
If you want to extend the behaviour of the instruction, or change its parameters, prefixes might achieve your goal.
There are 4 types of prefixes:
Lock and Repeat
Segment Override
Operand Size
Address Size
 
The following table shows the value in hex of the prefix and its mnemonic:
- Lock and Repeat:
	- 0xF0 — LOCK
	- 0xF2 — REPNE/REPNZ
	- 0xF3 - REP/REPE/REPZ
- Segment Override:
	- 0x2E - CS
	- 0x36 - SS
	- 0x3E - DS
	- 0x26 - ES
	- 0x64 - FS
	- 0x65 - GS
- Operand-Size Override: 0x66, switching to non-default size.
- Address-Size Override: 0x67, switching to non-default size.
 
Every instruction could have up to 4 prefixes and each prefix mustn't be used twice,
otherwise it could lead to undefined behaviour by the processor.
 
<i>Lock</i> prefix is used in order to lock the bus for writing.
It is used for spin locks and other techniques for the sake of code synchornization.
There is a small set of instructions which support the Lock prefix and that's also when the first operand is used as a memory indirection.
If this prefix is used for an instruction which doesn't support it or the first operand isn't a memory indirection form, an exception is
raised by the processor. In the case of the disassembler this prefix will be dropped (simply ignored).
 
There is a hack in the IA-32 processors to access CR8 register, using the Lock prefix for mov cr(n) instruction it acts
as the fourth (upper) bit of the REG field, this allows the processor reaching to the 8 upper CR registers.
 
The disassembler first makes sure the instruction is lockable and if so it validates that the destination operand is in the memory indirection form.
If these conditions aren't met, the prefix will be dropped.
 
<i>Repeat</i> prefixes are considered to be the same type of the Lock prefix, so an instruction could only have Lock or Repeat, not both at the same time.
Note that the disassembler is based on Intel's reference in this part of the code.
The AMD reference seperates the LOCK and the Repeat prefixes as two different types.
Repeat prefixes are used only with string instructions which support this prefix.
The disassembler ignores this prefix if used for other instructions, thus ending up with this prefix dropped.
There are two repeat prefixes, REPZ and REPNZ, repeat as long as the Zero flag (and rCX!=0) isn't set and vice versa.
 
Side note:
The meaning of rCX is a general-purpose register which can be one of the following: CX, ECX or RCX.
Notice the small letter 'r', which says it's one of the CX registers...The names of the register indicates its size,
which is defined according to the decoding mode.
 
Note that repeat prefix can be used as a mandatory prefix for SSE instructions.
 
The Repeat prefixes are treated specially with string instructions and when more prefixes are set.
It could change the textual representation of the instruction in some cases.
The way it's done in the disassembler is the same for all string instructions and is covered below.
One more thing to say about repeat prefixes is that IO string instructions also support this (such as: ins, outs).
 
<i>Segment Override</i> prefix is used in order to change the default segment for the instruction.
Every general-purpose register has its default segment. For example SS for ESP, DS for BX, etc...
If the instruction uses the memory indirection form and there is a segment override prefix set,
then it will be displayed in front of the operand. If the instruction doesn't support operands,
or in case the operands aren't in the memory indirection form, the prefix is dropped.
In 64 bits decoding mode the CS, SS, DS and ES segment overrides are ignored and ineffective.
 
<i>Operand Size</i> prefix is responsible for switching the operation size from the default size
(depends on the instruction and decoding mode) to the non-default mode.
It means that if the code is being run on a 32bits environment and the operand size prefix is used,
that specific prefixed instruction will be run as a 16bits instruction.
 
It is wrong to think that XOR EAX, EAX is different from XOR AX, AX - in their opcodes.
Both instructions have the same bytes. There are only two options for representing them these ways.
As stated earlier, most of the instructions are dependant on the decoding mode (16, 32).
So if you decode that XOR in 16 bits, you will end up with XOR AX, AX,
but if you decode that XOR in 32 bits, you will end up with XOR EAX, EAX.
The operand size prefix comes into play when you want to change the operation size of the instruction,
instead of the default size which is set by the decoding mode, to the non-default size.
If you decode the XOR instruction in 16 bits, but prefix it with operand size prefix, it will result in XOR EAX, EAX.
 
A known usage for operand size prefix in DOS (that is 16 bits code) was to fill the VGA screen using:
db 0x66
rep stosw
which actually run as:
rep stosd
 
Note that operand size prefix can be used as a mandatory prefix for SSE instructions.
 
<i>Address Size</i> prefix is quiet the same as Operand Size prefix, but acts on the memory indirection form of the operand.
It switches the memory indirection form to the non-default form.
Thus, if you read (in 16 bits) from [BP+DI], when prefixing it, the result is reading from [EBX].
(This is right, because 16 bits has a different memory indirections tables from 32 bits).
 
If you still ask yourself why you need both address and operand prefixes, the answer is right here.
Let's do some order in the mess:
You have to distinguish between the operand size and the address size.
The operand size acts on OPERATION size. The operation size is determined implicitly by the instruction.
For example (The default decoding mode is 16 bits):
MOV AX, BX --> we know the operation size is 16 bits, because we know that AX and BX are 16 bits registers.
MOV EAX, EBX --> 32 bits.
MOV EAX, [EBX] --> still easy, EAX is 32 bits, so we read 32 bits from the memory.
But what about this one:
MOV [EBX], 5 --> You see the problem, you don't know the operation size, it might be that we write only one byte, or maybe two or at last, four.
That's why in this case we have to explicitly tell the assembler, or display as the disassembler the operation size.
 
The confusion still exists.
MOV [BP+DI], DX --> 16 bits operation size.
 
MOV [EBX], DX
Now what!? No operand size is able to change BX into EBX in this case.
An operand size prefix won't affect the memory indirection form!
However, an address size prefix will affect it, thus changing BP+DI to EBX.
Even so, when the address size prefix is set, the operation size is untouched and stays the same one, the default one.
 
It is given that we decode in 16 bits in the following example:
MOV [BP+DI], AX --> Nothing special
MOV [EBX], AX --> This is done by Address Size prefix only.
MOV [BP+DI], EAX --> This is done by Operand Size prefix only.
MOV [EBX], EAX --> This is done by both address and operand size prefixes.
 
In the bottom line, the address size prefix affects the operand only if it's in the memory indirection form, otherwise it's ignored.
And the operand size affects the operation size, no matter in what form it is. It changes the amount of bytes the instruction is to work upon.
Of course, there are instructions which have a fixed operation size, thus the operand size prefix is ignored/dropped.
 
The behaviour of the operand/address size is defined in the following table (ignoring 64 bits!):
 
          /-------\
Default   |16 | 32|
          +-------+
Prefixed  |32 | 16|
          \-------/
 
Now that you know how all prefixes effects, I will describe how prefixes affect string instructions, using examples:
(Decoding mode is 16 bits)
AD ~ LODSW
66 AD ~ LODSD
F3 AC ~ REP LODSB
F3 66 AD ~ REP LODSD
F3 3E AC ~ REP LODS BYTE DS:[SI]
F3 67 AD ~ REP LODS WORD [ESI]
 
Notice that if the instruction is not required to be in the long form, it has a suffix letter which represents the operation size.
The long form of the string instructions are displayed when you change their address form or segment override them, which makes it explicit.
 
/----------------\
|Mandatory Prefix|
\----------------/
The mandatory prefixes are used as opcode bytes in special cases.
Their values can be one of: 0x66, 0xf2 or 0xf3.
The mandatory prefix byte must precede the first opcode byte, otherwise it is decoded just as a normal prefix.
When a prefix is detected as a mandatory prefix, its behaviour isn't taken into account as a normal prefix.
SSE instructions use the mandatory prefixes as part of the opcode itself,
it makes life a bit harder when fetching an instruction in the fetching phase.
This is covered thoroughly in the Decoding Phases!
 
/--------------------\
|REX Prefix - 64 Bits|
\--------------------/
REX stands for register extension.
One of the most important changes in 64 bits is that it permits access to 16 registers.
The REX prefix takes place <b>only</b> in 64 bits decoding mode.
 
'till now all you had is 8 general purpose registers.
Later on, I'm going to cover how the ModR/M is formatted and I will refer to the REX as well, so you see how it's related.
 
Anyways, the REX prefix must precede the first byte of the opcode itself, otherwise it is ignored.
I know I just wrote this same sentence about the mandatory prefix, but the REX prefix has a higher priority, calling it so.
So if there is a REX prefix set and a mandatory prefix is set as well, they won't interfere with each other!
It just comes out that the REX prefix has to be before the opcode itself, even if the mandatory prefix is set.
And the mandatory prefix should be set before the REX prefix if it's set, and before these two all other prefixes can precede, no matter their order.
 
The range of the REX prefix is 0x40 to 0x4f.
It means that in 64 bits it overrides the instructions INC and DEC, but these instructions have an alternative opcodes, so no worry.
 
So if we encounter a byte with the first (high) nibble with the value of 4, we know it's a REX prefix.
The REX is formatted as follows:
 
-7---4--3---2---1---0-- <-- Bits Index
| REX | W | R | X | B | <-- Field Name
----------------------- <-- End Line Marker
 
REX - 0x4, marks it is a REX prefix.
<b>W</b>idth - 0, default operand size. 1, 64 bits operand size.
Here is how the REX.W flag affects the final operand size of the instruction:
 
 
-------------------------------------
|Default   |Default  |With   |With  |
|Operating-|Operand- |0x66   |REX.W |
|Mode      |Size     |Prefix |      |
|----------+------------------------|
|64 Bits   |  64     |IGNORED|  1   |
|-----------------------------------|
|64 Bits   |  32     |  16   |  0   |
|-----------------------------------|
|64 Bits   |  16     |  32   |  0   |
-------------------------------------
 
REX.W with a value of 0 causes no change to the operand size of the instruction.
But a value of 1 causes the operand size to be 64 bits.
Note that if a REX.W is 1 and an operand size prefix (0x66) is also set, then the 0x66 byte is fully ignored!
However, if an operand size prefix is set and the REX.W is clear, that operand size will affect the instruction as well.
REX.W won't affect byte operations as well as operand size prefix.
 
So you see, when you disassemble instruction in 64 bits and a REX.W is set, the effective operand size becomes 64 bits.
Now all instruction support 64 bits, that is their operands' types.
On the contrast, there are some instructions that in 64 bits decoding mode their effective operand size becomes 64 bits by default,
they are called promoted instructions. There is a limited list of promoted instructions,
for example when you push a register in 64 bits you don't need the REX prefix to tell the processor it's a 64 bits register...
 
<b>R</b>egister field - 1 (high) bit extension of the ModR/M REG field.
inde<b>X</b> field - 1 (high) bit extension of the SIB Index field.
<b>B</b>ase field - 1 (high) bit extension of the ModR/M or SIB Base field.
 
Later on, I will explain precisely how these bits affect the decoding of registers.
I just wanted to make sure you get familiar with them first.
 
It is not true to assume that a REX prefix with a value of 0x40 doesn't have any implications on the instruction it precedes!
 
/------\
|Opcode|
\------/
Opcode is the static portion of the instruction which leads to (defines) the instruction itself.
It is the bytes (and bits) you read from a stream in order to determine what instruction it is.
The opcode size can vary from 1 bytes to 4 bytes. And it may also include 3 more bits from the REG field of the ModR/M byte.
The instruction fetching mechanism in the disassembler is based on opcodes only
(there could be tables which convert from ModR/M value to a string...).
It is explained below how the fetch mechanism works with more info about the opcodes' varying sizes.
Most of the instructions belong to two types: 8 bits instructions, and 16/32 bits instructions (could be prefixed...).
The 16 or 32 bits operation size is set according to the decoding mode. I mentioned it earlier in the operand size prefix paragraph.
Instructions which operate on 8 bits ignore operand size prefix.
There are some instructions which are 5 bits long and the 3 other bits are used as the REG field,
but treated as a whole byte instruction (for example: 40, 41 disassmbles to: inc ax; inc cx).
 
The machine code of the opcodes is more complex than bytes granularity.
I found it easier to treat opcodes as whole bytes and if required using the REG field as well.
It simplifies stuff and makes the DB smaller, including its hierarchic structure (Trie data structure).
 
/------\
|ModR/M|
\------/
Some instructions require the ModR/M byte in order to specify the operands' forms.
And some other instructions have the operands' types known in advance by their opcode only and don't need the ModR/M byte in order to specify them.
The ModR/M byte is optional. The ModR/M could lead to a sequential SIB byte in 32 or 64 bits decoding modes.
The opcode of the instruction itself has info about the operands' types, but these types, still could be
extended in some ways, for instance, having an immediate number, or just a bit more complex effective-address.
The role of the ModR/M is to define whether a SIB byte, an immediate or a displacement are required.
And more than that, it defines the registers in use, according to the operands' types.
The ModR/M is built from 3 fields:
 
-7---6--543---210--
| MOD | REG | R/M |
-------------------
 
The MOD field is the two most significant bits, it defines whether a displacement is used, and if so, its size.
Well, and a few more things, keep on reading. Ah and MOD stands for Mode, how original.
 
------------------
|MOD       | Bin |
|----------+-----|
|No DISP   | 00  |
|DISP8     | 01  |
|DISP16/32 | 10  |
|REG       | 11  |
------------------
 
MOD
00 means no displacement is used.
01 requires a displacement of 8 bits.
10 requires a displacement of 16 or 32 bits, the size is set by the decoding mode, and could be altered by (operand size) prefix, of course.
11 means that only general-purpose registers are in use.
 
The famous REG field (3 bits).
The REG field is used in order to specify the register of one of the operands, if used, of course.
(The REG field defines the source or destination operand, it depends on the opcode itself).
However, the special thing about it, is that it could be used just as a <i>part</i> of the opcode.
This merely 3 bits are used many times in many instructions (0x80-0x83).
Later on, it is explained how it becomes a part of the instructions DB.
 
At last, but not least, the R/M field. The R/M field stands for Register or Memory.
It has a different meaning, and its meaning is chosen according to the MOD field.
It might be a general-purpose register when MOD is 11, or it might be a register for memory addressing when MOD is not 11.
 
Notice that the operation size of the instruction wasn't mentioned yet,
this is because for the ModR/M itself, the operation size isn't a matter.
It becomes usable when you know the operands' types of the instructions,
so with both parameters you will know what registers are used.
 
The REG field or R/M field could be one of the following:
 
-:Value to Register Table (32 bits):----
|0   |1   |2   |3   |4   |5   |6   |7  |
|EAX |ECX |EDX |EBX |ESP |EBP |ESI |EDI|
|AX  |CX  |DX  |BX  |SP  |BP  |SI  |DI |
|AL  |CL  |DL  |BL  |AH  |CH  |DH  |BH |
|SS0 |SS1 |SS2 |SS3 |SS4 |SS5 |SS6 |SS7|
|MM0 |MM1 |MM2 |MM3 |MM4 |MM5 |MM6 |MM7|
----------------------------------------
 
The only way to know which registers set you should use is by the operand type itself,
and of course by the corresponding field's value.
 
Let's decode some (in 32 bits) :)
 
88 1B MOV [EBX], BL
 
So 88 is a 8 bits operation size instruction.
According to the specs 88 is defined as: MOV r/m8,r8
 
In short, the first operand type: r/m means the operand could be a register or a memory addressing.
The number following the r/m means the size of the instruction's operation.
The other operand type, r8 or r32, means that the operand must be a register, its size is known too.
 
Now that we know what's going on with these two operands and what to expect let's examine some bits:
 
0x1B in binary is 00011011, making it ModR/M compatible: 00-011-011
Knowing in advance the operands' types and the ModR/M, let's disassemble the instruction:
88 is decoded as: MOV,
The MOD is 00, means only a register for memory addressing is used.
But how do we know which operand uses what field (REG or R/M), that's according to the operand type.
So the R/M field used in this case as the Destination (=first) operand and has the value of 011, which is (3) EBX,
and we know it's an R/M operand, thus it is a memory indirection form.
We are left with the REG field, which in this case is also used, its value is 011 and decodes to (3) BL,
it's BL and NOT EBX because the operand size is 8 bits, see that.
 
Ok, another one:
According to the specs:
F6 /3 NEG r/m8
 
Let's decode some more hex (in 32 bits) :
F6 19
 
Two things to note, the "/3" means it uses the REG field (as a part of the opcode!) with a value of 3 for indicating it's a NEG instruction.
And the second thing, that it is a simple one-operand instruction.
 
So encountering F6, we know it's a "NEG" instruction, alright.
NO, that was not right! Encountering F6, we still don't know it's a NEG instruction, it could be something else,
but we will know that we have to read the REG field in order to get the desired instruction, so after isolating the REG field,
and testing it, we know it's the "NEG" instruction - now it's alright, for real.
You see, reading F6 tells us that we have to read 3 more bits (REG),
and only then we'll know the instruction, maybe if we read the REG we reach to another instruction,
for example: F6 /6 is the DIV instruction.
It's can't be that reading F6 tells us to read another whole byte for constructing the opcode, because then we would have collisions...
Getting the instruction, we know its operands, in this case only one operand.
By now you should know that type of operand.
 
0x19 in binary ModR/M style is 00-011-001
Notice that this time the REG field is indeed 3, which is the missing bits (1 byte, 0xf6 isn't enough to determine the instruction),
which completes the opcode fetching.
So the REG field was already used and is ignored for operand decoding.
We know MOD of 00, so we look up the table and get [ECX] (because R/M=1).
Eventually the instruction is decoded as: NEG BYTE [ECX]
The "BYTE" is an addition to show the operation size explicitly,
otherwise you could keep on guessing the operation size of this instruction, without having any clue.
 
As you can see,
there are 3 ingredients to a good instruction :)
An opcode (which is a must, of course)
and is bundled with the operands' types (in fact, this is 2 in 1 :).
And ModR/M which is optional, but necessary most of the times.
 
There are a few quirks to the ModR/M decoding,
how to get from a ModR/M to SIB wasn't explained yet.
It varies from 16 to 32 bits, which have different tables for decoding the ModR/M,
but I will stick to the 32 bits version, as I have already done.
Note that 16 bits don't have a SIB byte, thus there are no complex memory addressings in 16 bits.
 
The ModR/M byte when decoded to specify the ESP as a memory addressing register, actually tells the processor to read the SIB byte!
This is because when the R/M field's value is 4 (ESP register) it means the instruction includes the SIB byte,
so in order to really specify an operand as ESP, we will have to use a SIB byte for that.
 
And there is another special case when MOD is 00 and R/M is 5 (EBP register) it means the EBP is NOT used at all,
and that a Displacement of 32 bits follows the ModR/M byte.
That's why using the EBP register as memory addressing register takes one more byte (using MOD=01, Disp8=0), making it [EBP+00].
I guess Intel chose the EBP register instead of the others, because EBP is intended as a stack frame pointer, and will have a disp8 offset.
So it's not big deal to pay one more byte for the instruction when we usually use that byte anyways...
The special R/M=5 case, allows the instructions to use an absolute memory address, for example:
MOV [0x1234567], EBX
Otherwise it wasn't possible using only ModR/M.
 
-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-64 bits decoding mode + ModR/M-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~
 
If that was the same case in 64 bits decoding mode, when the R/M is 5 then the result was:
MOV [RIP+0x1234567], EBX
So when R/M is 5, the RIP or Register-IP becomes the base register.
And if you still want an absolute addressing in 64 bits mode, you will have to use the SIB byte with a couple of tricks.
Yes, you actually can get the position of the currently being executed code with LEA RAX, [RIP+0] Genius!
 
Back to REX prefix now. This is the most hard part in 64 bits decoding, so pay extra attention:
so if the REX.R is set, the REG field of the ModR/M becomes a 4 bits variable which indicates a register index.
And if the REX.B is set, the R/M field of the ModR/M becomes a 4 bits variable...ditto.
 
All the above extreme cases of the EBP/ESP reigsters don't apply to this new variable,
it means that even if the REX.R is set, a RIP will be used, or a SIB will be read if the REX.R is set and REG is 4...
Sometimes the REX bits are ignored and the other times they are took into account, it depends what action is being done,
it is all covered in the AMD64 documentation really well, in the bottom line,
the REX is ignored when the fields tell the processor to read the SIB byte or in the extreme cases explained earlier.
 
A fourth bit in the REG or R/M field permits access to 16 registers.
There are new sets of registers for 64 bits.
 
These are the 64 bits registers:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|RAX |RCX |RDX |RBX |RSP |RBP |RSI |RDI |R8 |R9 |R10 |R11 |R12 |R13 |R14 |R15 |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Even 32 bits registers can be extended!
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|EAX |ECX |EDX |EBX |ESP |EBP |ESI |EDI |R8D |R9D |R10D |R11D |R12D |R13D |R14D |R15D |
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Further 16 bits registers can be extended using the suffix letter 'W' instead.
 
In 64 bits decoding mode, there is a new set of registers accessible, the low bytes of SI, DI, BP and SP!
I wonder how compilers will use these bytes in the future...
Anyways, there are two tables now:
 
8 bits registers <b>without</b> REX prefix (nothing special yet):
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|AL |CL |DL |BL |AH |CH |DH |BH |R8B |R9B |R10B |R11B |R12B |R13B |R14B |R15B |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
8 bits registers <b>with</b> REX prefix set (no matter its flags!):
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|AL |CL |DL |BL |SPL |BPL |SIL |DIL |R8B |R9B |R10B |R11B |R12B |R13B |R14B |R15B |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This explains why a REX prefix with a value of 0x40 might affect the instruction, even with all bits cleared!
 
Note that the extended 32 bits registers could be used in memory addressing forms!
For example: INC DWORD [R8D + R15D * 8 + 0x1234].
 
One more comment about 64 bits -
the default addressing size is 64 bits, wheareas the default operand size is 32!
----------------------------------------
|Default   |Default  |With   |Effective|
|Operating-|Address- |0x67   |Address- |
|Mode      |Size     |Prefix |Size     |
|----------+---------------------------|
|64 Bits   |   64    |  No   |   64    |
|--------------------------------------|
|64 Bits   |   64    |  Yes  |   32    |
----------------------------------------
 
BTW - there are 16 XMM registers (SSE) as well in 64 bits.
 
/---\
|SIB|
\---/
SIB stands for Scale-Index-Base, it is a one byte which embodies these fields.
It is an optional byte and if used, it must be sequential to the ModR/M byte.
The SIB might be a part of the instruction only when the operand is in the addressing mode (MOD!=11).
The SIB makes the effective address more powerful, thus using less instructions in order to calculate complex addresses.
 
It formats as:
 
-7-----6-5-----3-2----0-
| SCALE | INDEX | BASE |
------------------------
 
And results in [INDEX * 2**SCALE + BASE].
 
The most significant two bits represent the SCALE field.
The scale field is used as a multiplication variant for the Index register.
The Index is multiplied by 2**Scale (powered), the Index register (3 bits long) could be any general-purpose register,
except the ESP register, makes sense, doesn't it?
 
The Base register is 3 bits long (less significant) and is used as a base address.
There is a special condition to this register, the base is ignored when it's the EBP register and MOD==00, recall it means
using a displacement of 32 bits.
 
In the bottom line, the special case comes to our call in 64 bits,
when we can't use an absolute memory address only (because then RIP is the base register automatically),
we are left with a special case:
If the MOD=00 and Base=EBP and Index=ESP, we end up with disp32 only.
Therefore even in 64 bits you can use absolute addresses!
 
So before we know which registers we are going to use,
we still have to decode the REX prefix, that is in 64 bits mode, and see how its flags affect the SIB.
REX.R is ignored when decoding SIB, because in order to read a SIB byte the REG field had to be 4.
 
So we are left with two more flags:
The REX.X flag is quiet easy to understand, it is only used as the high fourth bit of the Index field.
And the REX.B flag, which becomes the high fourth bit of the Base field.
 
If you are still confused, you should take a look at the AMD64 data sheets,
they have nice graphs describing these REX bits things...
 
 
/------------\
|Displacement|
\------------/
The displacement is optional, it might be used only if the R/M field defines so (recall the R/M table above).
The size of the displacement could vary from 1 byte, 2 bytes or 4 bytes, the MOD and R/M field define it too.
This field must follow the ModR/M byte or SIB byte if exists.
If this field is used, it will be used as part of the address.
The address size prefix affects the size of the displacement
(this is because it tells us to use the non-default addressing table, which has different definitions for the displacement).
In memory the displacement is stored in Little Endian.
 
/---------\
|Immediate|
\---------/
Instructions could load values into registers or use plain number in order to do other operations.
Instead of loading those values off the memory, they could be part of the instruction itself, hence their name.
The immediate could be treated as a signed number, and its size varies from 1 byte, 2 bytes or 4 bytes,
its size is dependant on the decoding mode and the (possibly set) prefixes.
The immediate is the last element in the instruction, and is stored in Little Endian.
</pre>